(gentle music)
- [Instructor] In this section,
you will learn to initiate the solicitation process,
evaluate bids and negotiate,
and approve and award competitive contracts.
This section should take you
approximately 30 minutes to complete.
(gentle music)
Now that you've drafted your requirements
and prepared either your statement of work,
or your statement of requirements
and chosen your procurement strategy, what's next?
The procurement specialists will develop
the acquisition strategies needed
to satisfy the requirements you provided.
This may include preparing the bid solicitation
documents, managing the bid evaluation process,
evaluating the financial proposals,
selecting the suppliers,
negotiating the procurement agreements,
and formalizing the procurement agreements,
but before we jump to the activity,
are you curious to see
examples of solicitation documents?
Why not visit the buyandsell.gc.ca website?
You will find many examples
from various organizations. And don't forget,
you will have a role to play
answering technical questions from
potential suppliers during the solicitation process.
(gentle music)
The solicitation document
has been prepared and distributed.
That's great.
Now it's time for more work.
Once the bidding closes, the manager,
along with their chosen bid evaluation team,
evaluates the technical bids
against the established technical evaluation criteria.
Some examples of this could involve reviewing
proposals to determine if bidders meet criteria,
such as qualifications and years of experience
in the field of work,
or how the proposed bids meet
the accessibility requirements
and the design specifications.
The procurement specialist then verifies
that the bids are complete,
sends the technical portion to the manager
and the technical team for review,
performs the financial evaluation
once the technical evaluation is done,
and conducts any negotiations necessary
on the manager's behalf
and applies the selection methodology.
For processes that fall within modern treaties,
such as Comprehensive Land Claims Agreement,
or the Treasury Board Directive on government
contracts, including real property leases
in the Nunavut Settlement Area,
the evaluation of indigenous benefits criteria
may be considered as part of the bids.
Did you know that communicating
with a supplier during a competitive process,
other than through bidders' conferences
and requests for information, could be seen
as favoritism or creating an unfair advantage?
So avoid communication with suppliers
during a competitive process.
Send them to your contract authority instead.
The following activity will help you confirm your
knowledge of the evaluation and negotiation phase.
For more information on the bid evaluation team,
see the job aid in the toolbox.
(gentle music)
Once a bidder has been selected based on their
ability to satisfy the requirement,
procurement specialist will seek
to have the contract approved.
This involves, when appropriate,
having the contract reviewed by peers
or legal services, a cost analysis review,
a risk review if the requirements changed,
a quality assurance review,
and possibly an approval by a contract review
and approval committee, or Treasury Board.
Once this process is completed,
the procurement specialist sends out
the contract documents for signature
by the delegated transaction authority,
or contracting authority in your organization,
and then the supplier.
In many cases, the procurement officer
is a delegated transaction authority
or contracting authority who signs the contract.
Are you wondering who will approve the contract?
The following activity will help you identify
the individuals with the signing authority.
(gentle music)
Following contract approval,
the procurement specialist will award the contract.
Depending on the contract's value,
the specialist may send regret letters
to unsuccessful bidders
and post a contract award notice
on PSPC's buyandsell.gc.ca/tenders site
to inform the public of the successful bidder.
Debriefings are provided
to unsuccessful bidders on request,
and should normally include an outline of the factors
and criteria used in the evaluation.
They are typically led by the procurement specialist
while you play the supporting role
of answering technical evaluation questions.
The only information provided to the bidder
is the evaluation of it's bid
and the score it's bid received.
Proposal information on any other bidder
must not be divulged.
(gentle music)
Take what you've learned into real life.
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
Take some time out from the course
to see how the solicitation process works
in your department.
Maybe your organization has an intranet page on
procurement, or maybe your procurement specialists
have the templates that you need.
Looking at previously prepared solicitation
documents can sometimes help.
And don't forget to check the Toolbox for a job aid
on the procurement process.
(gentle music)
Now that you've seen how to initiate the solicitation
process, evaluate bids and negotiate,
and approve and award competitive contracts, let's
see what you remember by taking this short quiz.